Update ocaml on Windows: add opam 2.2 (#2727)
ocaml/ocaml.org: data/tutorials/getting-started/3_01_ocaml_on_windows.md

│ Tier 3 │ 5.x with WSL2                   │ User supported.               │
│ Tier 3 │ 5.x with Docker                 │ User supported.               │
╰──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╯
```

## Installing Opam on Windows

Opam is distributed via winget for Windows. To install it, run the following command in your terminal:

```shell-session
> winget install Git.Git OCaml.opam
```

We recommend installing Git from `winget`; however, you can omit this step and install Git using your preferred method if needed.
Opam will look for a compatible Git and if none is found, it will prompt you with a set of options to install one.

After installation, launch a new shell to access the opam binary.

```shell-session
$ opam --version
2.2.1
```

Once opam is installed, run the `opam init` command to set up your opam environment.

You will notice that the repository information fetching stage takes a while to
complete. This is normal (for the moment), so we advise our users to get 
themselves their favourite hot beverage while it runs.

opam requires a Unix-like environment to function. By default, opam relies on `cygwin` and is also compatible with

> `msys2`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
opam requires a Unix-like environment to function. By default, 
opam relies on Cygwin and is also compatible with MSYS2.
```

At *init-time*, opam scans your machine for available Unix environments and
prompts you to choose your favourite option. We recommend
to let it create its own internal Cygwin installation that will remain managed
by opam. This cuts down the possible interferences of other tools
that interact with such environments might introduce. Think of it as a
sandboxed environment.

At *init-time*, opam scans your machine for available Unix environments and
prompts you to choose your favorite option. We recommend
letting it create its own internal Cygwin installation that will remain managed
by opam. This cuts down the possible interferences that other tools
interacting with such environments might introduce. Think of it as a

> sandboxed environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
It's duplicated

Opam's default behavior when initializing is to install a fresh `switch` as
well as an OCaml compiler of version `> 4.05`. By default, opam chooses `mingw` as
a C compiler when creating switches, but know that you can choose an alternative to it

> instead, like `msvc` with the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a C compiler when creating switches, but know that you can specify to install an 
alternative to it instead, like `msvc`, with the following command:
```

```
opam install system-msvc
```

After `opam init` completes, run the following command to update your environment:

> ```
> > for /f "tokens=*" %i in ('opam env --switch=default') do @%i
> ```

Reviewer: That command is only for CMD
````suggestion
On CMD:
```
> for /f "tokens=*" %i in ('opam env --switch=default') do @%i
```
On PowerShell:
```
> (& opam env --switch=default) -split '\\r?\\n' | ForEach-Object { Invoke-Expression $_ }
```
````

> 

Reviewer: Users may think that they need to keep that command somewhere to find easily.
```suggestion
Opam will display the shell update command each time it is needed.

```

<><> Required setup - please read <><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><>  🐫

  In normal operation, opam only alters files within ~\AppData\Local\opam.

  However, to best integrate with your system, some environment variables
  should be set. When you want to access your opam installation, you will
  need to run:

    for /f "tokens=*" %i in ('opam env') do @%i

  You can always re-run this setup with 'opam init' later.

opam doesn't have any configuration options for cmd; you will have to run for /f "tokens=*" %i in ('opam env') do @%i
whenever you change you current 'opam switch' or start a new terminal session. Alternatively, would you like to select a
different shell? [y/n] n
```

One detail to address about having a fully functional opam installation is
related to Git.

On Windows, there are many ways to have a functioning Git installation. Opam will
look for a compatible Git, and if none is found, it will prompt you with a set of
options to install one. 

```shell-session
<><> Git ><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><>  🐫
Cygwin Git is functional but can have credentials issues for private repositories, we recommend using:

>   - Install via 'winget install Git.Git'

Reviewer 2: This would be good to know from the outset. https://ocaml.org/install#windows recommends doing
```
winget install Git.Git OCaml.opam
```

⬇ retrieved ocaml-base-compiler.5.2.0  (https://opam.ocaml.org/cache)
∗ installed ocaml-base-compiler.5.2.0
∗ installed ocaml-config.3
∗ installed ocaml.5.2.0
∗ installed base-domains.base
∗ installed base-nnp.base
Done.
# Run for /f "tokens=*" %i in ('opam env --switch=default') do @%i to update the current shell environment
```

You can see that in this specific run of the command, opam chose `mingw` as
a C compiler, but know that you can very well choose an alternative to it
instead, like `msvc` with the following command:

```shell-session
$ opam install system-msvc
```

Once your environment has been updated with the given hint, you will have a
fully functional OCaml compiler available to you:

```shell-session
> for /f "tokens=*" %i in ('opam env --switch=default') do @%i

> ocaml --version
The OCaml toplevel, version 5.2.0

> ocaml
OCaml version 5.2.0
Enter #help;; for help.

# print_endline "Hello OCamleers!!";;
Hello OCamleers!!
- : unit = ()
#
```

## DkML

There is also [DkML] Windows installer. However, while [DkML] has a modern OCaml 4.14.2 compiler,
it does not track the latest OCaml compilers. We will officially support Windows as a Tier 1

> platform with a [major release of opam](#opam-22) in the coming months, and it will be compatible with

Reviewer 2: > `We `**`will`**` officially support Windows as a Tier 1 platform with a [major release of opam]`**`(#opam-22) in the coming months,`**

Already happened, hence this PR. This link will be broken.

category: "Resources"
---

## opam

> Opam now features a fully native Windows compatible installation process that we

Reviewer 3: I get the sentiment, but it isn't accurate to describe a Cygwin installation process as a fully native Windows compatible installation process. IMHO the real win is how easy it is to install Windows with opam 2.2 ... very few questions asked, no prereqs other than Git, etc. ... and the ease of install could be a good lead sentence.

recommend new users to follow below.

In order to have access to OCaml on a Windows PC, users have to use opam so that's our
first step.

> Windows Developers out there will already be familiar with `winget` which is

Reviewer 3: I wouldn't be surprised if less than half of devs know about winget. Even less actively using it. Perhaps I'm wrong, but I think it would be better to just remove the claim.

> the default package installer for Windows. Opam is now distributed with it. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Opam is now distributed via `winget` for Windows.
```

> ```shell-session

Reviewer 3: Thanks for showing the output! Makes it easy for user to follow and also shows them it is not complicated.

Successfully verified installer hash
Starting package install...
Path environment variable modified; restart your shell to use the new value.
Command line alias added: "opam"
Successfully installed
Notes: See https://opam.ocaml.org/blog for the latest news on how to use opam.
```

Once the package is installed, you can launch a new shell to have access to
your fresh opam binary.

```shell-session
$ opam --version
2.2.1
```

As for any other platform out there, you have to initialise your opam
installation with the `opam init` command. 

The first thing to know is that opam requires a UNIX-like environment to
function. By default, opam relies on `cygwin` and is also compatible with
`msys2`.

At *init-time*, opam scans your machine for available UNIX environments and
prompts you to choose your favourite option. That being said, it is recommended
to let it create its own internal Cygwin installation that will remain managed
by opam. This allows to cut down the possible interferences that other tools
that interact with such environments might introduce. Think of it as a
sandboxed environment.

You will notice that the repository information fetching stage takes a while to

> complete. This is normal and related to how files are handled on Windows, we

Reviewer 3: It is a bit weird to be assigning blame in a tutorial, but especially blaming Windows to Windows users is weirder still. (Also a bit inaccurate ... I would say / have said that the root cause is thinking that littering files on a filesystem is an adequate replacement for databases and package indexes, a line of thinking that most other package managers reject. Akin to blaming the performance without considering the data structure. But the broader point is all opinions are argumentative with no net benefit)

advice our users to go get themselves their favourite hot beverage while it

> runs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You will notice that the repository information fetching stage takes a while to
complete. This is normal (for the moment), we advice our users to go get 
themselves their favourite hot beverage while it runs.
```

  5. Abort initialisation

[1/2/3/4/5]
Checking for available remotes: rsync and local, git.
  - you won't be able to use mercurial repositories unless you install the hg command on your system.
  - you won't be able to use darcs repositories unless you install the darcs command on your system.

<><> Fetching repository information ><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><>  🐫
[default] Initialised

<><> Required setup - please read <><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><>  🐫

  In normal operation, opam only alters files within ~\AppData\Local\opam.

  However, to best integrate with your system, some environment variables
  should be set. When you want to access your opam installation, you will
  need to run:

    for /f "tokens=*" %i in ('opam env') do @%i

  You can always re-run this setup with 'opam init' later.

opam doesn't have any configuration options for cmd; you will have to run for /f "tokens=*" %i in ('opam env') do @%i
whenever you change you current 'opam switch' or start a new terminal session. Alternatively, would you like to select a
different shell? [y/n] n
```

One detail to address about having a fully functional opam installation is
related to Git.

> On Windows, there are many ways to have a functioning Git installation. Opam will

Reviewer 4: Isn't it recommended to obtain git via `winget`, too?

Reviewer: It is indeed. This sentence purpose is to introduce the Git opam init section.

∗ installed host-arch-x86_64.1
∗ installed host-system-mingw.1
⬇ retrieved mingw-w64-shims.0.2.0  (https://opam.ocaml.org/cache)
⬇ retrieved flexdll.0.43  (https://opam.ocaml.org/cache)
∗ installed flexdll.0.43
∗ installed ocaml-options-vanilla.1
∗ installed conf-mingw-w64-gcc-x86_64.1
∗ installed ocaml-env-mingw64.1
∗ installed system-mingw.1
⬇ retrieved ocaml-config.3  (2 extra sources)
⬇ retrieved ocaml-config.3  (2 extra sources)
∗ installed mingw-w64-shims.0.2.0
⬇ retrieved ocaml-base-compiler.5.2.0  (https://opam.ocaml.org/cache)
∗ installed ocaml-base-compiler.5.2.0
∗ installed ocaml-config.3
∗ installed ocaml.5.2.0
∗ installed base-domains.base
∗ installed base-nnp.base
Done.
# Run for /f "tokens=*" %i in ('opam env --switch=default') do @%i to update the current shell environment
```

You can see that in this specific run of the command, opam chose `mingw` as
a C compiler but know that you can very well choose an alternative to it
instead, like `msvc` with the following command:

```shell-session
$ opam install system-msvc
```

Once your environment has been updated with the given hint, you will have a
fully functional OCaml compiler available to you:

```shell-session

> > for /f "tokens=*" %i in ('opam env --switch=default') do @%i

Reviewer 3: Correct me if  I'm wrong, but if you install winget in a terminal, and then install opam using winget, any subsequent opam like `opam env` will fail with Not Found, right? Because opam won't be in the PATH.  If so, I think we need to insert a step to close and reopen the terminal.

Reviewer: True, this is specified at the [beginning](https://github.com/ocaml/ocaml.org/pull/2727/files#diff-30ebdb1b4b6fb66d5acb62775dcd5f2481c30c431b2e4a304b345359fbf19e86R45):
> Once the package is installed, you can launch a new shell to have access to
your fresh opam binary.

Here, it is have access to OCaml after opam init, so we already have a terminal that have an opam binary in the path.

> ocaml --version
The OCaml toplevel, version 5.2.0

> ocaml
OCaml version 5.2.0
Enter #help;; for help.

# print_endline "Hello OCamleers!!";;
Hello OCamleers!!
- : unit = ()
#
```

## DkML

> There is also [DkML] Windows installer. However, while [DkML] has a modern OCaml 4.14.0 compiler,

Reviewer 3: nit: 4.14.2

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is also [DkML] Windows installer. However, while [DkML] has a modern OCaml 4.14.2 compiler,
```

> ╰──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╯

Reviewer 2: > `│ Tier 1 │ OCaml 5 with Opam 2.2             │ Full support. `**`Coming in the next few months`**` │`

Already happened.

╰──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╯
```

## Installation Environments

> ### `opam-repository-mingw`

Reviewer 5: I think we can remove this section entirely since it is deprecated and opam-repository is now compatible with Windows.

### Visual Studio Code on Windows

> **If you use opam installation**, you will need to add opam switch prefix on your path that runs VSCode.

Reviewer 4: Perhaps there could be a link here on how to add switch prefix to the path?

Reviewer 3: Why is that needed at all? If it is needed, we should file a bug somewhere since that is quite unpleasant for a user.

Reviewer: I'll ping @dra27 on this one
